A key part of data exploration that you want to do in conjunction with data visualization is looking
at some descriptive statistics of the data that you're working with.
In the previous lessons we saw that our data set contained everything from price data to indexed data
to dummy variables.
And these were all measured in different ways.
So in this lesson I'm going to show you how you can pull up various different statistics on a data frame
which you could have a look at in conjunction with your data visualizations and how I personally think
this topic of descriptive statistics can be so utterly dull that I want to introduce it to you with
a short story imagine that it's an election year and the two leading political candidates are having
their big debate on television the very fictional conservative candidate by the name of Ronald dump
starts off the debate and says Friends Romans countrymen lend me your ears under my leadership the economy
has been doing splendidly and the average family is reaping the benefits over the past four years.
Average income has increased by over thirty thousand dollars.
Vote for me and then it's the opposition candidates turn candidate artillery Hinton takes the floor
and says don't listen to Ronald.
Today middle income families are earning thirty thousand dollars less than when Ronald took office.
My policies will help the typical family vote for me so hearing these two statements you might wonder
is one of the politicians lying or can both of these statements be true at the same time.
How can we reconcile these two seemingly contradictory claims.
Now it turns out that even though the two statements sound very similar these two politicians are not
talking about the same thing.
The Ronald is talking about the mean while artillery is talking about the median the mean is another
word for average and to calculate the mean income.
You simply add up all the families incomes and you divide them by the number of families the median
income on the other hand is calculated by arranging all the family incomes from lowest to highest and
then picking the one in the middle.
So in contrast to the mean the median is not affected so much by big outliers this whole discussion
in fact goes back to this idea of a distribution the shape of a distribution determines statistical
measures like the mean or the median.
Remember the screen histogram that I created with imaginary house price data.
This is in the shape of our old friend the normal distribution.
In this case both the median and the mean would be the same however.
What if this distribution was not normal.
What if we didn't have this pretty handy imaginary bell shaped curve for family incomes.
In that case the mean and the median won't be the same.
And this is a story of the politicians so the distribution is the second part of our answer.
The thing that happened to reconcile the two politicians statements is that the income distribution
has changed.
This is how it is possible for the average and the mean to move in separate directions.
You see if most people got slightly poorer but then very very few people become enormously wealthy going
all the way out to the right of this distribution into the tail then the mean and the median could be
trading places like in this slide.
So I hope this little story got you a little bit more interested in this topic of descriptive statistics.
So at this stage you might be asking well then what are a couple of good things to look at to better
understand the data we're gonna be looking at for things for now.
We're gonna be looking at the smallest value the largest value the mean value and the median value in
our dataset.
Lucky for us the python Panda's module makes all of the super easy and the panda data frame already
has a number of handy methods which we can use to instantly pull up this kind of information in our
notebook.
Let me show you how the first thing I want to do is going to add a little section heading here that
reads descriptive statistics
and now let me show you how we can pull up the smallest value in a particular column all of our data
frame say we want to know the smallest house price.
We can select a particular column or a series object with the square bracket notation.
If I type data square brackets price in all caps it's fronted by single quotes and then put a dot after
it and call the min method Min parentheses and hitting shift into we can see that the smallest house
price is five thousand U.S. dollars.
Now I don't know about you but I'd really like to see this house.
I mean for five thousand dollars in Boston.
I'm imagining some sort of rusty trailer on the outskirts of the city without running water and electricity.
Maybe with one of the radial highways on a bridge overhead.
But anyhow let's see what the largest value is using the system method Max.
So data square brackets quote price dot Max parentheses but bring up 50 Hatten since this is in thousands.
This is fifty thousand dollars.
How I know this doesn't sound like a lot but this isn't the 1970s.
So things were a bit cheaper back then now the cool thing about pandas is that you don't have to do
this for every single column in the data frame.
You can actually pull up the minimum and maximum values on the data frame object itself.
You can pull it up on the data frame as a whole so that right data dot Min parentheses.
I can see the minimum value in every single column at the same time.
Of course the same thing goes with data dot Max.
Which brings up the largest value in every single column.
So that's the largest and smallest values covered.
The other descriptive statistics that we've talked about that can be pulled up really easily were the
mean and the median.
So data don't mean parentheses.
We'll bring up the average value of every single feature and data dot median will bring up the typical
value or the middle value of every single feature in the data frame.
Now that's all very well and good but the thing is what if you're like me what if you're lazy typing
all this stuff in and getting out the above output is not very satisfactory.
What I want is I want all my stats at the same time and I want it to be formatted in a way that I can
easily read.
This is where the described method comes to the rescue data.
Don't describe parentheses well bring up a whole bunch of summary statistics from the data frame all
at the same time.
I love this method.
This is super super useful.
Now you may be looking at this and thinking hey wait a minute where is the median.
Don't cheat me out of the median.
Well not to worry.
It's right here in this 50 percent row.
This is where the median values are hiding.
Cool.
So this table is something very handy to pull up when you're working with a new data frame that you
haven't seen before.
You take the data frame and simply call the describe method and this will generate the descriptive statistics
that summarize the central tendency dispersion and the shape of the data sets distribution.
Just note this excludes not a number or non values if there are any in your data frame.
So it's quite clever.
Good stuff.
Now looking at this one of the things that I found quite interesting and that I'm noting down for later
is that there is an outlier in the number of rooms category that might be worth investigating.
We can see this in the summary statistics right here the reason I say it's an outlier is because the
average number of rooms and the median number of rooms is around six.
You can also see that most of the properties have between five point nine and six point six rooms.
So this property here with almost nine rooms is gigantic and also quite far from the norm.
So yeah I'm going to make a mental note of this for the analysis stage in the next lessons we're gonna
be looking at if and how our explanatory variables are 13 features move together we're gonna be looking
at their correlation I'll see you there.